THE LITERATURE OF THE
AMERICAN CONTINENT
REACHES BACK LONG
BEFORE THE ARRIVAL
OF CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS.
IN FACT, IT WAS ALREADY
WELL ESTABLISHED BEFORE
"AMERICA" EVEN EXISTED IN
THE EUROPEAN IMAGINATION;
BACK IN A TIME WHEN YOU
COULD HEAR TALES OF THE
MYTHICAL AZTLAN OR OF
THE MIGHTY TAHUANTINSUYU.
IN THOSE DAYS MILLIONS OF
INHABITANTS FROM DIFFERENT
PARTS OF THE CONTINENT
RECALLED GLORIOUS EVENTS
OF THE PAST, WORSHIPED
THEIR GODS, HONORED THEIR
RULERS AND LIVED
THEIR DAY TO DAY LIVES
IN A WORLD SUFFUSED WITH
SONGS, POEMS, ORAL EPICS,
DRAMAS, AND LEGENDS.
EACH TRIBE KEPT IN
ITS SHARED MEMORY
THE TALES OF
PAST TRIUMPHS
AND THE PROPHECIES
OF THE TIMES TO COME,
WEAVING A DAZZLING TAPESTRY
OF ANCESTRAL VOICES,
PRIESTLY WISDOM,
POPULAR LEGENDS,
TOGETHER WITH
DANCES AND PLAYS.
THIS WEB OF STORY AND
RITUAL SERVED AS THE
CULTURAL TOUCHPOINT FOR
TRIBAL CIVILIZATIONS
THROUGHOUT THE AMERICAS.
AND SO IT WAS THAT
THE NATIVE PEOPLES
WENT ON CREATING A
COLLECTIVE MEMORY
AND CULTURAL IDENTITY THAT
WAS FOREVER SHATTERED
BY THE ARRIVAL OF THE
"MEN OF CASTILLA".
*
IN ORDER TO UNDERSTAND
PRE-HISPANIC LITERATURE
IT'S IMPORTANT TO
UNDERSTAND THAT
IT IS A LIVING, DYNAMIC
ART FORM THAT TOUCHES
ALL OTHER ASPECTS
OF INDIGENOUS LIFE.
THIS ART CAN ENCOMPASS
DRAMAS, SONGS, POEMS,
DANCES, NARRATIVES
AND DISCOURSES.
THESE FORMS CAN PRESENT
MYTH, HISTORY, POLITICS,
AND DISCUSS THE ULTIMATE
CONCERNS THAT HAVE
PREOCCUPIED HUMANITY
EVERYWHERE - LIFE, LOVE,
DEATH, AND THE INEXORABLE
PASSAGE OF TIME.
ALTHOUGH PRE-HISPANIC
LITERARY TEXTS CAN BE
TRACED BACK MILLENNIA TO
THE CONTINENT'S EARLIEST
CIVILIZATIONS, THEIR
EVANESCENT NATURE MAKES IT
POSSIBLE FOR US TO REACH
ONLY A FEW OF THEM.
THEY ARE PREDOMINANTLY
ORAL WORKS PASSED DOWN
FROM GENERATION TO
GENERATION; TALES, SONGS
AND DISCOURSES THAT
DEPENDED ON A COMMUNITY
TO BRING THEM TO LIFE
AT EACH PRESENTATION.
BUT THE THREAD WAS BROKEN
WITH THE SPANISH CONQUEST.
THE FEW BOOKS THAT EXISTED
IN THE FORM OF CODICES
OR QUIPUS WERE DESTROYED,
AS WERE THE TEMPLES
AND MANY OF THE
INSCRIPTIONS THEY BORE.
IN THE ANDEAN
REGION, THE QUIPUS
- A REMARKABLE
SYSTEM OF KNOTTED
MULTI-COLORED STRINGS
USED FOR COMMUNICATION
- WERE BURNED, AND
THE WISE MEN, PRIESTS,
AND LEADERS WHO KNEW
HOW TO READ THEM
WERE HOUNDED TO
NEAR EXTINCTION.
DESPITE THIS SYSTEMATIC
AND MERCILESS OPPRESSION,
AND THANKS TO THE WILL
OF MANY TO HOLD ON TO
THE ESSENCE OF THEIR
CULTURE AND THEIR PAST,
A FRACTION OF THESE TEXTS
HAS MANAGED TO SURVIVE.
THEY SERVE
AS THE BASIS
FOR AN ONGOING
LITERARY TRADITION.
THE SOURCES FOR THESE
NATIVE TEXTS ARE MANY
AND ARE LOCATED THROUGHOUT
THE ENTIRE CONTINENT.
MESO-AMERICAN WORKS
SURVIVED DUE IN PART TO
AN INCIPIENT WRITING
SYSTEM THAT AROSE IN THE
ZAPOTECA REGION
- CURRENTLY MONTE ALBAN -
AND IN THE MAYA REGION.
IN ADDITION TO THESE TEXTS
THERE ARE MANUSCRIPTS
THAT WERE WRITTEN IN NATIVE
LANGUAGES OR HISPANICIZED.
THEY ARE THE FAMOUS BOOKS
OF THE CHILAM BALAM.
THEY COME FROM VARIOUS
PLACES: CHILAM BALAM
FROM CHUMAYEL - IT DEPENDS
ON WHERE THEY WERE FOUND.
MANY OF THOSE HAVE
BEEN PRESERVED,
THE FAMOUS POPOL VUH.
THEY ARE ALL BOOKS THAT CAME
FROM PRE-HISPANIC CODICES
AND WERE TRANSCRIBED
TO ALPHABET WRITING.
IN CENTRAL MEXICO
THAT HAPPENED LESS,
THE PRE-HISPANIC SYSTEM
WAS MAINTAINED.
WHY? BECAUSE THE
EMPIRE WAS SURGING,
IT WAS A
GREAT EMPIRE,
AND WHAT WE ALSO
DID IN CENTRAL AMERICA,
THAT WAS ALREADY HAPPENING
IN THE PRE-HISPANIC TIMES
IS WE HAD AN OFFICIAL
LANGUAGE OF THE EMPIRE,
WHICH WAS THE NAHUATL,
AND MANY CODICES WERE
WRITTEN IN NAHUATL.
MANY OF THESE WORKS WERE
COLLECTED IN THE SIXTEENTH
AND SEVENTEENTH CENTURIES
BY FRIARS WHO WERE EAGER
TO PREACH THE GOSPEL,
BUT AT THE SAME TIME WERE
FASCINATED BY THE
CULTURAL RICHNESS
OF THE NATIVE PEOPLES.
INDIGENOUS TEXTS HAVE ALSO
BEEN SUMMARIZED, COPIED,
AND REFERENCED BY NATIVE
OR MIXED-RACE HISTORIANS
SUCH AS ALVA IXTLILXOCHITL
AND ALVARADO TEZOZOMOC
IN MEXICO; THE INCA
GARCILAZO DE LA VEGA
AND GUAMAN POMA DE AYALA IN
PERU, AND SEVERAL SPANIARDS:
THE HISTORIAN FRANCISCO
LOPEZ DE GOMARA,
THE SOLDIER BERNAL
DIAZ, AND THE FRIARS
ANDRES DE OLMOS,
BERNARDINO DE SAHAGUN,
AS WELL AS THE MONK
JUAN DE TORQUEMADA.
THERE'S AN INTEREST
OF OFFICIALS,
OF ROYAL OFFICIALS OF THE
SPANISH CROWN AND FRIARS,
TO KNOW MORE ABOUT
THE PRE-HISPANIC PAST.
THE REASONS WERE
VERY PRACTICAL -
TO COLLECT TRIBUTES AND
HOW THEY WERE COLLECTED,
WHO COLLECTED THEM, AND
HOW THEY WERE GIVEN OUT
- BASIC THINGS
LIKE THESE.
LAND BORDER PROBLEMS
- TWO TOWNS WOULD
GO TO COURT, FIGHTING,
AND THEY WOULD
HAVE TO DECIDE WHO
THE LAND BELONGED TO.
THEY WOULD SHOW CODICES AS
PROOF OF THEIR ARGUMENT.
IT'S NECESSARY TO
KNOW HOW IT WORKS.
FRIARS DEDICATED TO
EVANGELIZATION NEEDED TO
KNOW ABOUT THE OLD CUSTOMS
TO MODIFY, ERADICATE THEM.
OVERLOOKED FOR MUCH OF
POST-COLONIAL HISTORY,
THESE WORKS WERE
REDISCOVERED AT THE
BEGINNING OF THE TWENTIETH
CENTURY BY HISTORIANS,
ANTHROPOLOGISTS,
AND ETHNOGRAPHERS.
ADMIRED FOR THEIR
AESTHETIC BEAUTY AND
THEIR INSIGHT INTO
THE HUMAN CONDITION,
THESE COMPOSITIONS
HAVE BECOME CENTRAL
TO LATIN AMERICAN
IDENTITY.
THE PROCESS OF
INTERPRETING THESE
MATERIALS IS
IN GOOD HEALTH
AND IS BEING
DONE AS WE SPEAK.
MANY THINGS STILL NEED TO
BE DONE - DOCUMENTS LEFT
TO BE PUBLISHED, TO GET
TO KNOW, TO BE STUDIED IN
THEIR HISTORICAL CONTEXT,
NOT SEPARATE FROM IT.
A LOT HAS ADVANCED
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT THE
NECESSITY OF CONTEXT,
AS A FUNDAMENTAL
METHODOLOGICAL RESOURCE
TO UNDERSTAND THEM.
THESE TEXTS WERE
ORIGINALLY COMPOSED IN THE
VARIOUS NATIVE LANGUAGES
OF THE CONTINENT.
MANY OF THE MOST IMPORTANT
PIECES WERE WRITTEN IN
NAHUATL, THE LINGUA FRANCA
OF THE MEXICAN EMPIRE
BEFORE THE ARRIVAL
OF THE SPANIARDS.
THEY WERE ALSO COMPOSED
IN THE MAYAN FAMILY
OF LANGUAGES - YUCATECAN,
QUICHE, TZOTZIL, AND
TZELTAL - AND IN AYMARA,
GUARANI, AND QUECHUAN.
MANY WORKS WERE TRANSLATED
INTO SPANISH, SUMMARIZED,
AND INTERPRETED BY
FRIARS AND SCRIBES.
AS A RESULT, IT'S OFTEN
DIFFICULT TO RECONSTRUCT
THE PATTERNS OF NATIVE SPEECH
IN SUBSEQUENT VERSIONS.
HOWEVER, IN MANY OF THE
TEXTS AVAILABLE TODAY
WE CAN STILL HEAR THE DISTANT
ECHOES OF MUSICALITY,
THE LINGERING
SOUNDS OF A PAST
THAT IS STILL ALIVE
IN MANY COMMUNITIES.
THE MESO-AMERICAN TERRITORY
WAS ONE OF THE FIRST
REGIONS TO FEEL THE YOKE
OF SPANISH CONQUEST,
COMING ONLY SOME TWENTY
YEARS AFTER THE ARRIVAL OF
COLUMBUS AT THE WESTERN
COAST OF GUANAHANI.
BECAUSE OF ITS COMPLEX
AND FASCINATING TRIBAL
HISTORY, MESO-AMERICA IS A
TREASURE TROVE OF TALES,
MYTHS, AND SONGS - MANY
OF WHICH CAN BE FOUND ON
STONE INSCRIPTIONS
AND MONUMENTS.
IN FACT, ONE OF THE
MOST ANCIENT FORMS OF
MESO-AMERICAN WRITING CAN
BE FOUND AT MOUNT ALBAN,
IN THE STATE OF OAXACA.
THIS SERIES OF DRAWINGS
AND INSCRIPTIONS
IS KNOWN AS "LOS
DANZANTES" - THE DANCERS
- ALTHOUGH THE
FIGURES ARE TODAY
BELIEVED TO BE
SACRIFICED PRISONERS.
IN ADDITION TO THESE
IMAGES AND INSCRIPTIONS,
THERE WERE TEXTS
COMPOSED ON AMATE PAPER
OR DEER SKIN BY
SCRIBES AND PRIESTS
KNOWN AS "CODICES".
WE MUST SAY THAT
THE WORD "CODICES"
IS NOT A WORD THAT BELONGS
OR DESCRIBES THEM.
AND WHAT WE CALLED CODICES
BELONGED TO THE MAYAN
CULTURE AND AZTEC CULTURE
IN GENERAL, AND THEY ARE
BOOKS - IN WESTERN TERMS
THEY ARE CONSIDERED BOOKS
WHICH WERE MADE FROM THE
BARK OF TREES CALLED AMATL.
THEY WOULD STICK THEM
TOGETHER FORMING THE
FLAT PART AND THEY
WOULD HAVE A PROCESS
TO MAKE THE
EQUIVALENT OF PAGES.
THEN THEY WOULD COVER
THEM WITH WHITEWASH
TO CREATE A SURFACE
THAT THEY COULD DRAW ON.
MANY OF THE CODICES WERE
DISCOURSES ON THE GODS,
ASTRONOMY, OR ON THE
ANCIENT ART OF CHRONICLING
THE PASSAGE OF TIME
WITH CALENDARS -
A SKILL AT WHICH THE
MAYANS IN PARTICULAR
FAR SURPASSED THEIR
EUROPEAN COUNTERPARTS.
THE NAMES OF THEIR MONTHS ARE
RELATED TO CERTAIN NATURAL
PHENOMENA OR EVERYDAY LIFE,
BASED ON AGRICULTURE.
FOR EXAMPLE, ATLCAHUALO,
THE LOWERING,
WATER GOING DOWN, RELATED
TO WHEN WATER DESCENDS.
OR TLAXOCHIMACO, THE
OFFERING OF FLOWERS,
MEANING THERE
ARE FLOWERS.
OR IN THE CASE
OF ETSACALIZQUI,
THE EATING OF
CORN AND BEANS,
MEANING THE MOMENT OF HAVING
CORN AND BEANS TO EAT.
THEY ARE INTERESTING
SIGNS OF THE CALENDAR
THAT ALLOW US TO
CREATE A LINK BETWEEN
FESTIVITIES AND THE
AGRICULTURAL YEAR.
IT'S BASICALLY A
CALENDAR TO ESTABLISH
AND UNDERSTAND THE
CYCLES OF THE STARS.
BECAUSE IN THE
MESO-AMERICAN WORLD
STARS ARE NOT THINGS,
THEY ARE BEINGS WITH
A WILL OF THEIR OWN.
PERSONALITY, THEY ARE GODS.
SO THE CALENDARS ALLOW,
AMONG OTHER THINGS,
ESTABLISHING CONTACT.
THE FACT IS THAT
MESO-AMERICANS WERE QUITE
ADEPT AT WRITING IN ITS
MOST ELEMENTARY FORM,
THE PICTOGRAM.
MOREOVER, MANY INHABITANTS,
ESPECIALLY THE MAYANS,
HAD MORE DEVELOPED
SYSTEMS OF WRITING
THAT USED IDEOGRAMS
AND PHONETIC SYMBOLS.
IN MESO-AMERICA THE TYPE
OF WRITING THEY HAD,
UNLIKE OURS, WAS
HIEROGLYPHICS.
ITS SCIENTIFIC NAME IS
LOGOSYLLABIC, MEANING
IT'S NOT ALPHABETIC, IT
DOESN'T HAVE LETTERS,
IT HAS A SERIES
OF SYMBOLS.
THESE SYMBOLS CAN
BE UNDERSTOOD AS
WHOLE WORDS
OR LOGOGRAMS
OR SYLLABLES, WHICH
ARE PHONETIC SYMBOLS.
AND THESE COMBINED
ARE HOW THEY WRITE.
CODICES WERE OFTEN
ACCOMPANIED BY LONG
ORAL SET PIECES THAT
WOULD BE MEMORIZED
BY YOUNG APPRENTICES
AT SCHOOLS.
THESE WERE CALLED
CALMECACS AND WERE
KEPT IN LIBRARIES
KNOWN AS AMOXCALLI.
IN THE MEXICAN
SONG MANUSCRIPT,
AN AUTHOR RUMINATES ABOUT
THE NATURE OF HIS WORK:
I SING THE WORDS OF THE
BOOK AS I SPREAD THEM
I AM LIKE A
COLORFUL PARROT,
I MAKE THESE
CODICES SPEAK UP
INSIDE THE HOUSES
OF PAINTINGS.
RICH WITH METAPHORS AND
IMAGES OF GREAT BEAUTY,
THESE COMPOSITIONS
WERE DIVIDED INTO
CUICATL - SONGS
AND POEMS,
AND TLAOLLI - STORIES
AND DISCOURSES.
MANY OF THEM
ARE ANONYMOUS
OR WRITTEN BY
UNKNOWN AUTHORS.
THEY HAVE BEEN PASSED DOWN
THROUGH THE GENERATIONS
BY MEANS OF MEMORIZATION
AND REPETITION.
BUT THERE ARE ALSO
COMPOSITIONS WRITTEN BY
OVER THIRTY
WELL-KNOWN AUTHORS;
THE MOST FAMOUS OF THESE
BEING NEZAHUALCOYOTL,
RULER OF TEZCOCO
IN CENTRAL MEXICO.
THE CUICATL ARE
RHYTHMIC COMPOSITIONS
THAT WERE OFTEN
ACCOMPANIED BY MUSIC.
THEY SERVED AS SACRED
HYMNS TO BE SUNG AT
RELIGIOUS FESTIVITIES,
AND AS WAR SONGS.
THEY RECOUNTED STORIES
OF FAMOUS LEADERS,
OF WELL-KNOWN VICTORIES
OVER FEARSOME ENEMIES.
AND THEY EXALTED THE PEOPLE'S
HISTORY AND THEIR CITY.
FULL OF PRIDE, THE CITY OF
MEXICO-TENOCHTITLAN RISES;
HERE, NO ONE FEARS
DYING AT WAR.
THIS IS OUR GLORY.
THIS IS YOUR INSTRUCTION
OH, GIVER OF LIFE!
BEAR IT IN MIND, OH
PRINCES; DO NOT FORGET.
WHO COULD SIEGE
TENOCHTITLAN?
WHO COULD MOVE THE
HEAVENLY FOUNDATIONS?
THERE ARE ALSO SONGS
OF FLOWERS, OF SPRING,
STORIES OF LOVE AND
OF GRIEF THAT MEDIATE
THE PRIMAL THEMES
OF LIFE AND DEATH.
AM I TO GO WITH THE
FLOWERS THAT PERISHED?
WILL NOTHING BE
LEFT OF MY NAME?
NONE OF MY FAME
HERE ON EARTH?
AT LEAST MY FLOWERS!
AT LEAST MY SONGS!
HERE ON EARTH IS THE PLACE
OF THE EVANESCENT MOMENT.
IS THIS WHAT
IT IS ALSO LIKE
WHERE SOMEHOW
THERE IS LIFE?
IS THERE ANY JOY,
ANY FRIENDSHIP?
OR IS IT ONLY
HERE ON EARTH
THAT WE HAVE COME
TO SEE OUR FACES?
OTHER NAHUA COMPOSITIONS
INCLUDE THE TLATOLLI -
THE "SPEAKINGS",
WHICH INCLUDE TALES,
STORIES AND
OTHER DISCOURSES.
AMONG THESE ARE THE
HUEHUETLATOLLI -
LITERALLY, THE WORDS
OF WISDOM OR AGE.
MANY OF THESE WERE
COLLECTED TOGETHER
BY FRIAR ANDRES DE OLMOS
IN AROUND THE YEAR 1530.
THESE WORDS WOULD HAVE
BEEN HEARD ON SPECIAL
OCCASIONS, SUCH AS THE
DEATH OF A TRIBAL LEADER,
A WEDDING, A BIRTH,
OR A PUBLIC CEREMONY.
THROUGH THEM IT IS
POSSIBLE TO GLIMPSE
INTO THE PSYCHOLOGY
AND PHILOSOPHY
OF THE PEOPLES OF
CENTRAL MEXICO.
THERE WERE ALSO TLATOLLIS
DEVOTED TO THE VARIOUS
DIVINITIES, STORIES OF
ANCIENT THINGS, LEGENDS,
MYTHOLOGICAL TALES, AND
EVEN INCANTATIONS THAT
WOULD BE CHANTED BY
ASTROLOGERS AND SEERS.
AT THE FOUNDATION OF
INDIGENOUS LITERATURE
ARE THE CREATION MYTHS
AND STORIES OF THE GODS
THAT SATURATED INDIGENOUS
LIFE BEFORE THE CONQUEST.
IN CENTRAL MEXICO
THERE IS A FAMOUS STORY
IN WHICH THE EARTH IS
CREATED IN FIVE AGES.
THIS IS THE LEGEND
OF THE FIVE SUNS:
THE SUN OF WATER,
OF EARTH, OF FIRE,
OF WIND, AND
OF MOVEMENT.
IN EACH SUCCESSIVE AGE
THERE APPEARED VARIOUS
ANIMALS AND HUMANS
COMPOSED OF DIFFERENT
MATERIALS: MUD, ASHES,
WOOD, AND FINALLY CORN.
THIS ETIOLOGICAL SYSTEM
RESEMBLES THAT FOUND IN
OTHER SEMINAL TEXTS
SUCH AS THE POPOL VUH
OF THE QUICHES, OR THE
BOOKS OF THE CHILAM BALAM
FROM CHUMAYEL.
THE SOURCE OF THE NAHUA
GODS IS THE SUPREME DEITY,
CALLED OMETEOTL, THE
"GOD OF DUALITY".
OMETEOTL IS BOTH
MOTHER AND FATHER,
AND IS THAT FROM WHICH
ALL ELSE IS CREATED.
EACH OF FIVE SUNS TELLS
OF ONE MOMENT OF CREATION
AND OF DESTRUCTION
OF THE WORLD.
AS MEN WERE MADE OF
MUD, ASHES, OR WOOD,
THEY WERE WEAK
AND THEY DIED.
AND SO THE GODS,
HORRIFIED TO WITNESS
THEIR DESTRUCTION
AND SUFFERING,
DECIDED TO DIE IN A
SACRIFICE OF FIRE.
THEY THREW THEMSELVES
INTO THE FLAMES AND ARE
CONSUMED BY FIRE,
GIVING BIRTH TO THE SUN,
THE MOON AND THE CORN.
THIS IS WHY THE NAHUAS
BELIEVED THAT THE SUN
EXISTS BY VIRTUE OF THE
SACRIFICE OF THE GODS,
WHO IN TURN DEMAND
THE SACRIFICE OF MEN.
IT WAS REFERRED,
IT WAS HEARD THUS
THERE HAD ALREADY
BEEN FOUR LIVES,
AND THAT THIS WAS
THE FIFTH AGE.
IN THE YEAR 13, CANA,
THEY SAY CAME TO EXIST,
AND SO WAS BORN THE
SUN THAT IS TODAY.
THEN IT SHONE,
AND IT DAWNED,
THE SUN OF MOVEMENT
THAT IS TODAY.
ANOTHER CULTURAL ICON
OF THE MESO-AMERICANS
WAS QUETZALCOATL, KNOWN
BY THE MAYAS AS KUKULCÁN,
WHO WAS BOTH A GOD AND
A PRIEST OF THE TOLTECS.
LEGEND HAS IT THAT
QUETZALCOATL DETESTED
HUMAN SACRIFICE.
AS A RESULT, HE WAS
DECEIVED BY HIS ENEMIES,
AND WAS FORCED TO LEAVE THE
CITY TO SUFFER IN PURGATORY.
BUT THE LEGEND FORETOLD
THAT HE WOULD COME BACK
ONE DAY, BRINGING ABOUT
THE END OF THE PRESENT AGE
AND THE RETURN OF
THE "GOLDEN AGE".
IT WAS SAID THAT
QUETZALCOATL WOULD RETURN
FROM THE PLACE WHERE
THE SUN GOES OUT.
THE STORY GOES THAT AT
FIRST THE SPANIARDS
WERE THOUGHT TO BE
THIS LONG-AWAITED GOD,
AND SO THEY WERE GIVEN THE
NAME OF TETEUH, OR GODS.
ANOTHER NOTEWORTHY LEGEND
RECOUNTS THE BIRTH
OF HUITZILOPCHTLI,
THE SUN.
HUITZILOPCHTLI WAS
CONCEIVED WHEN A BEAUTIFUL
BALL OF PLUMAGE TOUCHED
THE BOSOM OF COATLICUE,
HIS MOTHER.
HER BROTHERS, BELIEVING
SHE HAD BEEN DISHONORED,
RESOLVED TO PUT
HER TO DEATH.
HUITZILOPCHTLI WAS BORN AS
A FULLY REALIZED WARRIOR,
AND HIS BIRTH LITERALLY
TORE HIS MOTHER APART -
WHICH IS WHY SHE IS
REPRESENTED AS A
DISMEMBERED BODY
IN ICONOGRAPHY
AT THE TEMPLO MAYOR
OF TENOCHTITLAN.
IRONICALLY, HUITZILOPCHTLI
WAS BORN TO DEFEND HIS MOTHER.
CARRYING DARTS AND A
SHIELD OF EAGLE'S FEATHERS,
HE DEFEATED HER
ENEMIES EACH IN TURN.
MANY OF THE
NAHUA SACRIFICES
WERE DEDICATED TO HIM.
AND THIS HUITZILOPCHTLI;
AS IT WAS SAID,
WAS A PRODIGY, FOR WITH
ONLY ONE FINE FEATHER
THAT FELL UPON HIS
MOTHER, COATLICUE'S WOMB
HE WAS CONCEIVED.
NO ONE EVER APPEARED
AS HIS FATHER.
HE WAS WORSHIPPED
BY THE MEXICAS,
OFFERED SACRIFICES,
HONORED AND SERVED,
AND HUITZILOPCHTLI
REWARDED THOSE WHO DID SO.
THE GODS WERE HONORED
IN SONG AND IN CHANTS
WHICH WERE GATHERED
TOGETHER IN A COLLECTION
OF SACRED HYMNS BY FRIAR
BERNARDINO DE SAHAGUN.
THEY WERE ALSO COLLECTED
IN CODICES SUCH AS THE
MATRITENSE, THE HISTORIA
TOLTECA-CHICHIMECA,
AND THE FLORENTINO.
THESE SONGS WERE SUNG IN
PRAISE OF THE ESSENTIAL
DIVINITIES OF MESO-AMERICA
- TLALOC, THE GOD OF RAIN
AND FERTILITY; XOCHIPILLI,
THE GOD OF LOVE, GAMES,
SONG AND DANCE; COATLICUE
THE MOTHER OF THE GODS;
OMETEOTL, THE GOD OF
DUALITY, AND MANY OTHERS.
THEY ARE A TESTAMENT
TO THE COMPLEXITY
OF THE MYTHICAL AND
RELIGIOUS BELIEFS
OF THE ANCIENT MEXICANS.
FOR A TRADITIONAL SOCIETY,
AS THEY ALL WERE UNTIL
THE 18TH CENTURY, THE
RELIGIOUS FESTIVITIES
WERE REAL
MILESTONES IN TIME.
IN ANCIENT TIMES, IN
THE PRE-HISPANIC ERA
PARTICULARLY, THE
CELEBRATIONS AND
CEREMONIES OF CERTAIN
PARTS OF HISTORY,
WHICH WAS PRISTINE AND
FUNDAMENTALLY MYTHICAL,
WHERE GODS ACTED OUT, HAD
ALMOST ALWAYS TO DO WITH
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION.
AMONG THE MANY MYTHICAL
HISTORICAL STORIES OF
MESO-AMERICA, PERHAPS
THE MOST RENOWNED
IS THE POPOL VUH.
A LITERARY JEWEL OF NATIVE
AMERICA CONSIDERED BY MANY
TO BE THE "BIBLE" OF
THE MAYAN PEOPLES.
IT WAS PROBABLY
TRANSCRIBED FROM
HIEROGLYPHS BY MAYA
PRIESTS AND CLERKS
IN THE SIXTEENTH
CENTURY.
THE MANUSCRIPT WAS
DISCOVERED IN THE EARLY
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
BY A PRIEST NAMED
FRANCISCO XIMENEZ IN
CHICHICASTENANGO, GUATEMALA.
HE TRANSLATED THE
MANUSCRIPT INTO SPANISH.
AS THE ORIGINAL TEXT HAS
BEEN LOST, ALL THAT
IS LEFT IS XIMENEZ'S
VERSION OF THE ORIGINAL.
THE POPOL VUH IS A CASE
OF ALPHABETICAL WRITING
FOR WHICH WE DON'T HAVE
THE PICTOGRAPHICAL TEXT,
BUT WE HAVE AND WE KNOW
THROUGH INTERNAL REFERENCES
THAT IT IS BASED ON A
PICTOGRAPHICAL TEXT.
BUT IT HAS DISAPPEARED.
HOWEVER, THE TEXT TELLS
US THIS CONSTANTLY.
IT GIVES US THE
SIGNS AND GESTURES
SUGGESTING THAT TEXT.
THE POPOL VUH CONTAINS
THE CULTURAL HISTORY
OF THE QUICHE PEOPLE.
THE NARRATIVE CAN BE
DIVIDED INTO TWO SECTIONS:
THE MYTHICAL AND
THE HISTORICAL,
ALTHOUGH THE BOUNDARIES
BETWEEN THE TWO
ARE NOT ALWAYS
EASY TO DEFINE.
WE ARE ABOUT TO BEGIN
THE ANCIENT STORY
KNOWN AS THE QUICHE.
WE SHALL BEGIN TO WRITE,
TO TELL THE ANCIENT
TALE OF THE BEGINNINGS,
OR THE ORIGIN, OF ALL
THAT WAS CARRIED OUT
IN THE QUICHE CITY BY THE
MEN OF THE QUICHE TRIBES.
WE SHALL PORTRAY
WHAT HAPPENED
BEFORE THE WORD OF GOD,
BEFORE CHRISTIANITY;
WE SHALL REPRODUCE
IT FOR WE NO LONGER
HAVE THE VISION
OF THE POPOL VUH,
THE VISION OF DAWN, OF
THE ARRIVAL FROM OVERSEAS,
OF OUR LIFE
IN THE SHADOWS,
THE VISION OF
THE DAWN OF LIFE.
THE POPOL VUH TELLS OF
THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD
AND ITS DIFFERENT AGES,
WHEN THE GODS CREATED
THE EARTH AND ALL
THAT IS IN IT,
INCLUDING ANIMALS
AND HUMAN BEINGS,
WHO INITIALLY LACKED
THE GIFT OF SPEECH.
AS IN THE LEGEND
OF THE SUNS,
THE GODS FIRST MAKE HUMANS
OUT OF WEAK MATERIAL
- FIRST OF MUD,
AND THEN OF WOOD.
THEY INEVITABLY DIE BECAUSE
THEY ARE UNABLE TO THINK
AND THEY ARE UNWORTHY
OF THEIR CREATORS.
IN ANOTHER AGE, THE GODS
CREATE MEN WHO ARE IN FACT
TOO WISE: "THEY UNDERSTAND
ALL BY JUST OBSERVING.
THEY DOUBT NOTHING, THEY
ARE DETACHED FROM NOTHING".
SO THE GODS BLOW UPON THEM
TO MAKE THEIR SIGHT FOGGY
AND UNCLEAR.
THEY NARRATE MYTHS,
EVERYDAY LIFE, HISTORY,
RIVALRIES AND WARS
AMONG DIFFERENT GROUPS.
A STUDIOUS MAYAN
TELLS US ABOUT POETRY,
ABOUT NARRATIONS THAT WE
COULD CALL SHORT FICTION,
ABOUT MANY ANNALS
- WHICH ARE THE STORIES
OF DIFFERENT GROUPS -
THEIR ANCESTORS AND
THEIR RIGHT TO THE LAND.
THE FIRST PART OF THE
STORY ENDS WITH THE
VICTORY OF THE TWINS,
HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE,
OVER THE INHABITANTS
OF XIBALBA,
WHO ARE CREATURES
FROM THE UNDERWORLD.
IN AN EPIC SCENE, THE
TWINS AVENGE THEIR
FATHER'S DEATH AT A
BALL GAME, AND THEN,
TRIUMPHANT, ASCEND
INTO HEAVEN.
THE SECOND PART OF THE
POPOL VUH BEGINS WITH
THE CREATION OF CORN - A
VITALLY IMPORTANT STAPLE
- AND RELATES THE TALE
OF THE "CORN PEOPLE".
THE POPOL VUH GOES ON TO
CHRONICLE THE STORY OF
THE QUICHE AND THEIR
CONSOLIDATION OF POWER.
OH, CREATOR, EDUCATOR,
LOOK AT US, LISTEN.
DO NOT LEAVE US,
DO NOT ABANDON US,
YOU THAT ARE IN
HEAVEN AND ON EARTH,
HEART OF HEAVEN,
HEART OF EARTH.
LET THE NATIONS FIND
PEACE, TRUE PEACE,
AND LET THEM
FIND HAPPINESS!
LEAD US TO A GOOD LIFE
AND A WHOLE EXISTENCE.
LET IT DAWN AND LET
THE AURORA COME.
THE CHILAM BALAM IS
A COLLECTION OF BOOKS
WRITTEN IN THE MAYA
LANGUAGE IN THE
SEVENTEENTH AND
EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES.
THE CHILAMES WERE
IMPORTANT PRE-HISPANIC
PRIESTS, AND CHILAM BALAM
PURPORTS TO CONTAIN
THE SECRETS OF THE
MAYA CIVILIZATION.
TODAY ITS STORIES
ARE A PRIMARY SOURCE
FOR OUR UNDERSTANDING
OF MAYA RELIGION, HISTORY,
FOLKLORE, MEDICINE,
AND ASTRONOMY.
IT IS SUPPOSED THAT THERE
WERE ONCE MANY MORE BOOKS
IN THE CHILAM BALAM
COLLECTION, THOUGH ONLY
A HANDFUL, NAMED FOR
THE TOWNS IN WHICH
THEY WERE WRITTEN, HAVE
SURVIVED UNTIL TODAY.
IN THE MAYAN FIELD WHERE
TODAY THE WRITINGS ARE
80% OR 85% DECIPHERED,
THERE WAS A SERIOUS PROBLEM
WITH THE GREAT
MAYAN INVESTIGATOR,
MR. J. ERIC THOMPSON.
HE SAID THERE WAS NO SUCH
THING AS MAYAN WRITINGS,
THAT IT WAS ONLY
SYMBOLS, ESOTERIC.
FROM THE MOMENT OF
THOMPSON'S DEATH
THERE WAS A LEAP TOWARDS
DECRYPTING MAYAN WRITING,
UP TO TODAY WHEN WE
CAN SAY THAT MAYBE,
AT THE MOST, THERE
ARE 5% OF RESEARCHERS
WHO DENY THERE
WAS MAYAN WRITING.
IT'S CLEAR THE MAYANS HAD
WRITING; THAT'S INDUBITABLE.
THE MAYAN WORLD COMES BACK
TO THE EUROPEAN CULTURAL
AWARENESS BECAUSE IT HAS
SURVIVED ARCHITECTURALLY.
SO THE BOOKS
DIDN'T SURVIVE.
BUT BECAUSE THE MAYANS
WROTE ON EVERYTHING -
ON PAPER, ON STONE, ON
WHATEVER - TEMPLES WERE
DISCOVERED THAT WERE
COVERED IN WRITING,
AND THAT MAKES THE STUDY
OF THE GLYPHS BEGIN AGAIN.
THESE TEXTS WERE
PRESERVED, COPIED,
AND AMENDED BY
SUCCEEDING GENERATIONS.
THEY INCLUDE CHRONICLES
AND PROPHECIES,
INCLUDING ONE THAT
SEEMS TO PREDICT
THE ARRIVAL OF THE
"MEN OF CASTILLA".
OH, IZTA! WIZARD
OF THE WATER,
THE COWARDS COME FORTH,
WHITE FROM THE SKY,
THE WHITE CHILDREN
OF THE SKY.
THE STICK OF WHITE
SHALL DESCEND,
COMING FROM THE HEAVEN,
IT SHALL BE EVERYWHERE,
AT DAWN YOU WILL
SEE THE SIGNAL
ANNOUNCING ITS ARRIVAL.
THE BOOKS OF THE CHILAM
BALAM RETAIN THEIR
CURRENCY TO THIS DAY, AND
CONSTITUTE AN ESSENTIAL
PART OF A CULTURE
THAT CONTINUES TO
REINTERPRET THEIR
MEANING IN NEW CONTEXTS.
THE CHILAM BALAM IS A
TEXT THAT CONTINUES
TO BE WRITTEN AND
CONTINUES TO BE PAINTED,
WHICH ALSO HAS GLYPHS.
IT IS NOT A TEXT
THAT GIVES US DATA,
BUT IT IS A TEXT THAT
CONTINUES GIVING PROPHECIES
AND CONTINUES ELABORATING
AND CONTINUES HAVING
DIFFERENT INTERPRETATIONS
OF THE CALENDAR
AND ANTICIPATING EVENTS
IN ALPHABETICAL WRITING.
THE LITERATURE
OF THE ANDES,
THOUGH RICH AND COMPLEX
IN ITS OWN RIGHT,
IS NOT WELL KNOWN
OUTSIDE THE REGION.
THE INCAN EMPIRE BOASTED
A STRONG FEDERALIST SYSTEM
WHICH EMPHASIZED
CENTRALIZED AUTHORITY,
AND THE LITERATURE IT
SPAWNED PROMOTED A SINGLE,
SOMEWHAT PROPAGANDISTIC
VERSION OF THE PAST
IN WHICH PRIMITIVE,
BARBARIAN WAYS PREVAILED
UNTIL THE ARRIVAL
OF THE INCAS,
WHICH LED TO AN ERA OF
GREAT SPLENDOR AND GLORY.
THE ANDEAN AREA HAD
SIMILAR YET AT THE SAME
TIME DIFFERENT PROBLEMS
COMPARED TO MEXICO.
IN THE ANDEAN AREA THERE WAS
NOTHING LIKE THESE CODICES.
THERE WERE NO OBJECTS OF
SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATION
OF THE MEMORY THAT THE
EUROPEANS COULD RECOGNIZE
AS SUCH.
THE ANDEAN CULTURE, AS
MOST PEOPLE WOULD SAY,
IS THE MOST ORIGINAL.
IT SEEMS TO BE A LOCAL
INVENTION, NOT LESS
VALUABLE BECAUSE OF THIS,
BUT THE PEOPLE SEEM TO
HAVE KEPT TO THEMSELVES
AND THEY DIDN'T RECEIVE
ANYTHING FROM ANYONE,
THEY WERE VERY SECLUDED.
ONE REASON LITERATURE FROM
THE ANDEAN REGION HAS BEEN
MARGINALIZED IS THE
SYSTEMATIC SUPPRESSION
OF ITS INDIGENOUS METHOD
OF RECORDING INFORMATION
- THE QUIPU, A COMPLICATED
SYSTEM OF CORDS,
KNOTS AND COLORS IN
VARIOUS COMBINATIONS.
THE QUIPUS WERE READ
BY A SPECIALIST,
KNOWN AS THE
QUIPU-CAMAYOC,
WHO WAS ESSENTIALLY A
KIND OF INCAN ACCOUNTANT.
THIS SYSTEM WAS USED TO
RECORD THE LIFE STORY
OF AN ENTIRE CULTURE;
EVERYTHING FROM ANIMAL AND
HUMAN CENSUSES TO THE EPIC
STORIES OF THEIR RULERS,
STARTING WITH THE
MYTHICAL MANCO CAPAC.
THE QUIPU WAS ONE ELEMENT
OF A LARGER SYSTEM
OF COLLECTIVE INCAN MEMORY
WHICH ALSO INCLUDED
ORAL TRADITIONS, THE WORK
OF THE QUIPU-CAMAYOC,
AND THE BUREAUCRATIC
INFRASTRUCTURE
OF THE INCAN EMPIRE.
WITH THE COMING OF
THE CONQUEST, HOWEVER,
THIS SYSTEM
WAS DEVASTATED.
THE QUIPUS WERE
CONFISCATED AND DESTROYED,
THE QUIPU-CAMAYOC
WERE SUPPRESSED,
AND THE
EMPIRE COLLAPSED.
A GREAT MANY TALES OF
THE ANCIENT INCAS WERE
COMPILED BY NATIVE AND
MIXED-RACE CHRONICLERS
SUCH AS GUAMAN POMA DE
AYALA, FATHER BLAS VALERA,
AND GARCILASO DE LA
VEGA, WHO TRANSCRIBED
HIS PEOPLE'S STORY
FOR LATER GENERATIONS.
OTHER ACCOUNTS AND POEMS
HAVE BEEN HANDED DOWN
THROUGH THE CENTURIES
AND COME TO US WITH THE
TRAUMATIC RECOLLECTION
OF A TIME GONE BY.
ONE OF THE FUNDAMENTAL
TEXTS IN THE ANDEAN WORLD,
AN ACCOUNT OF THE
GENESIS OF THE UNIVERSE,
IS THE MANUSCRIPT KNOWN AS
RUNA YNDIO BY HUATOCHIRI.
ACCORDING TO THE RUNA
YNDIO - CONSIDERED BY MANY
TO BE THE POPOL
VUH OF THE ANDES -
THE WORLD UNDERWENT FOUR
AGES CALLED PACHACUTI.
EACH AGE WAS MARKED BY
A PARTICULAR CATACLYSM:
THE FLOOD, THE
ECLIPSE, FIRE,
AND THE "AUCA",
OR WARRIOR SPIRIT.
THE STORY HAS TWO HEROES:
PARIARCA AND PACHACAMAC.
THEY ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR
TENDING TO THE HUACAS,
A TERM THAT REPRESENTS
SOMETHING REVERED
SUCH AS AN ANCESTOR, A GOD
OR EVEN A CHARACTER TRAIT.
THE STORY HAS MANY
ELEMENTS IN COMMON
WITH THE MESO-AMERICAN
LEGEND OF THE SUNS.
IT WAS PICKED UP BY
CULTURES THAT BORDERED
THE TAHUANTINSUYU,
INCLUDING THE AMAZONIAN,
THE MAPUCHE, AND THE
CHIBCAN CULTURES.
THE JAYLLIS IS ANOTHER
IMPORTANT COMPONENT
OF INCAN
LITERARY CULTURE.
THESE SACRED HYMNS ARE
DEDICATED TO PRAISING
THE GODS AND TO RECOUNTING
THE GREAT MYTHIC TALES.
THEY WERE CULTIVATED
BY THE AMAUTAS,
A SPECIAL CLASS
OF WISE MEN,
AND WERE CHANTED DURING
SOLEMN CEREMONIES.
THERE ARE JAYLLIS
DEDICATED TO WIRAQUCHA,
TO THE MOTHER MOON, TO THE
FIRST INCA, MANCO CAPAC,
AND TO PACHACHAMAC.
FATHER, LORD OF
ALL CREATION!
WHEREABOUTS IN THE
UNIVERSE ARE YOU?
IN HEAVEN OR IN THE
WORLD OR HERE ON EARTH?
POUR YOUR WATERS FOR
YOUR POOR, FOR YOUR MEN.
QUECHUA LITERATURE ALSO
INCLUDES THE GENRE
KNOWN AS ARAWIS, A KIND
OF SONG THAT IS HIGHLY
ATTUNED TO THE RHYTHM
OF THE HUMAN CONDITION:
LOVE, PAIN, JOY,
SATIRE, GRIEF, DEATH.
THE MOST FAMOUS OF THE
ARAWIS IS APU OLLANTAY,
A DRAMATIC WORK THAT IS
CENTRAL TO THE ANDEAN CANON.
APU OLLANTAY TELLS
A CLASSIC STORY
OF LOVE AND WAR.
WHEN THE NOBLE COMMONER
OLLANTAY IS DENIED
THE HAND OF THE
PRINCESS CUSI COYLLOR,
DAUGHTER OF PACHACUTEC,
HE REBELS AGAINST THE INCA
AND SETS UP
HIS OWN REALM.
ULTIMATELY HE IS DEFEATED BY
THE LOYAL GENERAL RUMINAWI.
IN AN UNEXPECTED
ACT OF MERCY,
OLLANTAY AND CUSI
COYLLOR'S LIVES ARE SPARED,
AND THEY ARE
ALLOWED TO MARRY.
THE TAKI, THE WAYNU,
AND THE GHASWA
ARE OTHER INDIGENOUS
FORMS OF COMPOSITION,
COMBINING MUSIC,
DANCE, AND SONG,
OFTEN IN THE FORM OF
A RECITED DIALOGUE
AMONG GROUPS OF
MEN AND WOMEN.
DRAMA WAS AN IMPORTANT
MECHANISM FOR ENABLING
THE INCAN CULTURE
TO SPEAK TO ITSELF,
AND THERE WERE SEVERAL
GENRES AVAILABLE
FOR THIS CONVERSATION
TO TAKE PLACE.
THE ARANWAY ARE SATIRICAL
FABLES BASED IN THE EVENTS
OF EVERYDAY LIFE, AND THE
WANKA ARE SOLEMN WORKS
EVOKING THE PAIN
OF LOSS AND GRIEF.
SOME OF THE BETTER KNOWN
WANKA THAT WE STILL HAVE
MEMORIALIZE THE DEATHS OF THE
INCAS HUASCAR AND ATAHUALPA.
LET US CRY, LET US
CRY TEARS OF BLOOD,
IN DESPAIR,
LET US CRY ALOUD
FOR THE SUN HAS
FOREVER TAKEN AWAY
THE LIGHT
FROM HIS EYES.
HIS BROW WE
SHALL SEE NO MORE,
NOR SHALL WE
HEAR HIS VOICE
NOR WILL HIS TENDER
EYES CARE FOR HIS PEOPLE.
THE HISTORY AND SOCIAL
STRUCTURES OF THE NATIVE
PEOPLES OF AMERICA
WERE NEITHER SIMPLE
NOR PEACEFUL BEFORE THE
ARRIVAL OF THE SPANIARDS.
GREAT EMPIRES ROSE AND
FELL, WARS WERE FOUGHT,
TRIBUTES WERE DEMANDED
OF SUBJECT PEOPLES.
THE STORIES THESE
CULTURES TOLD
WOVE TOGETHER AN INTRICATE
NARRATIVE TAPESTRY
OF FACT, FICTION, AND
POETIC EXPRESSION.
EVEN THE MYTHICAL ACCOUNTS
SUCH AS THE POPOL VUH,
THE CHILAM BALAM OR THE
APU OLLANTAY SERVED TO
ASSERT THE LEGITIMACY
OF THE RULING CLASS
OR OF A RIGID
SOCIAL HIERARCHY.
THE CODICE DESCRIBED THE
HISTORY OF THAT LEADER,
EVERYTHING HE
HAD CONQUERED,
EVERYTHING HE HAD DONE.
THAT CREATES A PROBLEM
THAT MANY RESEARCHERS
FORGET ABOUT.
BY HAVING
PRE-HISPANIC DOCUMENTS
ONE BELIEVES THE INDIGENOUS
WORD IS THE WORD OF GOD,
BUT THAT'S NOT TRUE.
WRITINGS OF THE PAST
LIED AS WE LIE TODAY.
THE KINGS WOULD,
LOGICALLY,
SAY WHAT WAS IN
THEIR BEST INTEREST
AND WHAT THEY
WANTED PEOPLE TO KNOW.
THEY WOULD TALK ABOUT
THEIR BATTLES, BUT ONLY
OF BATTLES THEY HAD WON,
NOT THE ONES THEY LOST.
IT WAS BETTER FOR NOBODY
TO KNOW ABOUT THEM.
YOU MUST TAKE THAT INTO
ACCOUNT WHEN STUDYING
PRE-HISPANIC,
MESO-AMERICAN WRITING.
THE PAINTER OF CODICES
MUST ALWAYS BE CONSIDERED
AS AN INDIVIDUAL
CONNECTED IN SOME WAY
TO THE DOMINANT GROUP.
WHY? BECAUSE THE CODICES
ARE ALWAYS A WAY OF SHOWING
THE INTERESTS, THE
HISTORY, THE ELEMENTS,
WHICH ARE PART OF THE
DOMINATING GROUP,
TO JUSTIFY THEIR
RULING OVER THE REST.
IF IT'S A TRIBUTARY CODICE
IT CONTAINS THE ACCOUNTS
OF WHO PAID WHAT.
IF IT'S A HISTORIC CODICE,
IT'S PARADIGMATIC HISTORY
- A HISTORY OF POWER,
A HISTORY OF THE
DOMINANT GROUP WHICH
IS ALWAYS JUSTIFYING
WHY THEY ARE THE
ONES WHO DOMINATE.
THE ARRIVAL OF THE
SPANISH WAS AN EXPERIENCE
UNPRECEDENTED IN THE
ANNALS OF THE INDIGENOUS
PEOPLE OF CENTRAL
AND SOUTH AMERICA.
NEVER IN THE THOUSANDS
OF YEARS OF PRE-HISPANIC
HISTORY HAD THERE BEEN
A SIMILAR ENCOUNTER.
NOR WOULD HISTORY REPEAT
ITSELF ON THIS SCALE AGAIN.
IT WAS AN EXPERIENCE THAT
WOULD BRING ABOUT EXTREME
AND IRREVOCABLE CHANGE,
USHERING IN A PERIOD OF
CEASELESS UNCERTAINTY
AND CULTURAL ANXIETY.
THE RESULTS OF THE SPANISH
CONQUEST WERE NOTHING
SHORT OF CATASTROPHIC
FOR THE NATIVE PEOPLE.
DEVASTATION WROUGHT BY
DISEASES SUCH AS SMALLPOX;
THE DESTRUCTION OF
CITIES AND TEMPLES;
THE RELOCATION AND FORCED
LABOR OF ENTIRE POPULATIONS.
A HUNDRED YEARS AFTER THE
ARRIVAL OF THE SPANISH,
THE NUMBER OF INDIGENOUS
PEOPLE HAD SHRUNK TO
10% OF THE PRE-HISPANIC
POPULATION.
THIS HUMAN CATASTROPHE
HAD ENORMOUS IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE PRESERVATION
OF CULTURAL MEMORY -
THE STORIES AND ACCOUNTS
THAT HAD BEEN HANDED DOWN
THROUGH THE GENERATIONS.
THIS TRAUMA IS PRESENT
IN THE NATIVE ACCOUNTS
OF THE CONQUEST,
IN THE OMNIPRESENT
SENSE OF FOREBODING
THAT LURKS IN SONGS
OF PROFOUND DRAMA AND
PAINSTAKING BEAUTY.
ALSO OUR MONKS, WHEN THEY
ARRIVE, A BIG PROBLEM
RESEARCHERS AND CONTEMPORARY
CULTURE ALSO HAVE,
IS THAT WHEN THEY ARRIVE
AND FIND OUT ABOUT
THE CONTENT OF THE BOOKS,
WHICH ARE RELIGIOUS,
THEY ARE CONSIDERED THE WORK
OF THE DEVIL AND ARE BURNT.
THERE ARE FAMOUS
WRITINGS OF FAITH,
"MANI" BY FRIAR
DIEGO DE LANDA,
WHICH WERE SUSPECTED, AS WERE
THOUSANDS OF MAYAN BOOKS,
AND IN CENTRAL MEXICO
IN TENOCHTITLAN.
THE ONE BY ZUMARRAGA,
BISHOP ZUMARRAGA WHO
BURNT AZTEC CODICES.
THEN THEY WERE PERSECUTED
BY THE INQUISITION
FOR A LONG TIME, AND
TO OWN AN ANCIENT BOOK
WAS PUNISHABLE
BY THE STAKE.
THE BOOK AND THE OWNER
WERE BURNT, OF COURSE.
DESPITE THEIR
CULTURAL DEVASTATION,
THE INDIGENOUS PEOPLE USED
THEIR LITERATURE TO GIVE
VOICE TO THEIR STRUGGLE,
COURAGE, AND LAMENTATION.
THIS VOICE CAN BE HEARD IN
THE POIGNANT SONGS CALLED
ICNOCUICAT IN MESO-AMERICA
OR THE WANKA FROM THE
ANDEAN REGION, COMPOSED TO
REMEMBER THE CATASTROPHE
BUT ALSO TO HONOR THE
COURAGE OF RESISTANCE,
TO SAFE KEEP THE MEMORY
OF WHAT HAD HAPPENED,
AND TO TRY TO
MAKE SENSE OF IT.
WITH A STRONG DESIRE FOR
PRESERVATION AND SURVIVAL,
MANY NATIVES BECAME
LITERATE IN THE
LANGUAGE OF THEIR
CONQUERORS IN ORDER TO
PRESERVE THEIR
TRADITIONAL WORLD VIEW
AND OTHER PIECES
OF THEIR OWN PAST.
THIS ABILITY TO REFLECT
ON THEIR OWN HISTORY
WOULD ALSO ENABLE THEM,
IN THE YEARS TO COME,
TO OVERCOME THE TRAUMA OF
THE CONQUEST, TO REBUILD
THEIR SHATTERED IDENTITY
AND TO CREATE A NEW ONE.
FIVE CENTURIES LATER THOSE
VOICES CAN STILL BE HEARD,
THAT "VISION OF
THE DEFEATED".
AND ALL THAT
HAPPENED WITH US.
WE SAW IT,
WE ADMIRED IT.
WITH THE LAMENT AND
SADNESS OF OUR LOT,
WE FELT ANGUISHED.
BROKEN DARTS LIE
ON THE ROADS,
SCATTERED
IS THE HAIR.
THERE ARE NO
ROOFS ON THE HOUSES,
AND THEIR WALLS
ARE REDDENED.
WORMS WALK AROUND THE
STREET AND SQUARES,
AND THE GUTS ARE
SPLATTERED ON WALLS.
RED ARE THE WATERS,
AS IF THEY WERE DYED,
AND WHEN WE
DRANK FROM THEM,
IT WAS AS IF WE
DRANK SALT WATER.
MEANWHILE, WE KNOCKED
ON THE MUD WALLS,
AND OUR LEGACY WAS
BUT A NET OF HOLES.
SHIELDS WERE
USED AS REFUGE,
ALTHOUGH SHIELDS CANNOT
PROTECT THEM FROM SOLITUDE.
*